
# personal_stories

## Vispute Family

### Beginnings with my Father Laxman
I am Padmakar Laxman Vispute. My parents, my children and their grandchildren are all ananda margiis by Baba's grace. The first margii in our family was my father Laxman Vispute. My father in his teenage years was already a devotee. He used to say that he wants to become a sanyasii (monk). He didn't want to marry. With his thirst he already had found a guru who was known as Tukdoji Maharaja. Tukdoji convinved my father, "Don't become a sanyasii, lead a married life. You will find a good guru in future and you will find God." And his words came true! 

In 1963, my father was travelling somewhere through an ST (state transport) bus. With Baba's leela, in the bus, next to him was Acarya _______________ dada. He conversed with my father on spirituality. Dada__________ explained to him that for spiritual progress he should learn meditation, practice meditation, do seva and eventually you shall come closer to God. My father agreed to get initiated. After practising meditation he realized the significance of meditation. He then also got my mother initiated. I was just 4-5 years old boy then. I didnt get initiated. Although very soon our house became a regular place for Dadas, Didis and margiis. We used to have regular Dharmacakra. I used to observe and enjoy their company. 

In course of time with his devotion, meditation and seva, my father realized who Baba really was. And finally in some time, my father got an opportunity to have P.C. (Personal Contact) with Baba (i.e. meeting with Baba). Now we were from Goldsmith family. In our caste eating non-vegetarian food was common. My father already had great conduct and devotion but the remaining correction was made by Baba. Baba told him "Bura khana tyagna hoga"[hindi] ie "you have to stop eating bad food" (non-vegetarian, onion, garlic). On hearing this my father made the promise and from that day onwards our entire family became vegetarian. 

We all used to regularly go to DMC (Dharma Maha Cakra) to enjoy the spiritual environment and see Baba and seek his blessings. We were from a poor family and my father sometimes would think that among thousands if Baba will ever remember him. And to his surprise amongs hundreds and thousands when Baba was nearby, Baba would shout out to him "Aur laxmanji sab thik hai"(And Laxmanji, everything fine with you all?). My father would feel so blessed.

In the initial years it was not easy. My uncles and some family members grew worried about my family. My uncle would scold my father "Stop doing this crazy business. Your wife, your kids all will leave you." One day he even slapped my father. And he was about to slap my mother too. But my mother stopped him there itself and said "Dont you dare! Why are you opposed to us? We are only taking God's name and serving his children. You shall regret opposing us in future. And then you will realize that Baba is only one who can save you". In future my mother's words came true. My uncle had some tragedies in this family. And by then he had realized what Anandamarga was. He in those difficult years came back to my mother and asked for forgiveness. 

There was another uncle from my mother's side who used to tease us "oh hello Baba Nam Kevalam, how are you all?". My mother once told him "Why do you tease us? Instead do sing Baba Nam Kevalam daily, something good will happen to you. Maybe you will get a home posting". This uncle had a government job, and was posted far away from his family. Some years later he confessed to my mother, "Your words came true. I actually started doing Baba Name Kevalam kirtan. And in a few weeks I got posted to our hometown! I was so surprised!".

In his old age, my father fell sick. He had some deadly tumor in his stomach. An expert and kind doctor took his case. He advised my father for surgery. And that although there are great risks, surgery was the only option where he had chances to live. My father agreed. On the day of the operation my fahter did dhyana. In his dhyana he saw Baba's varabhay mudra and Baba assured him that everything will be okay. The surgery started. At that time and with my father's case even the doctor was not completely sure on how to do the surgery. With Baba's grace as the doctor started with the surgery he started hearing an internal voice directing him with the steps. He followed the steps. And the operation which started in the morning concluded in the evening with full success! My father was free from the tumour and fine. Later the doctor explained this to my fahter. My father smiled and said that it was his guru who guided him. My fahter's surgery was one of it's kind and succesful. The doctor was so amazed that later he would conduct seminars with other surgeons and explain them my fahter's case and the techniques and strategy used. With his nature and the success of the case, the doctor decided not to charge my father for the surgery. However my father out of his own wish collected some funds and paid the fees to the doctor.

My mother _________ was also a great devotee. She actually already before her marriage to my father was part of navnath sant. She was already vegetarian and had her own meditation and rituals. After getting initiated, she became a strong devotee of Baba. She then devoted her full energy and time to only our family and Baba's mission. When Baba visited Mumbai, my parents and other other margiis went to greet Baba. My mother being maharahtrian wore the authentic traditional nav-vari sarii and did Baba's arati at the airport.

Those years, my parents and the margiis were blessed to enjoy company of dadas, didis, other margiis and Baba! From Maharashtra our traditional dish of Amras (mango pulp) and Puran poli (roti stuffed with dal and jaggery) was known to be popular. And Baba Himself would enjoy the dish very much. Margiis from my region would prepare the dish wih love and in DMC would bring it to Baba. Baba would taste a little, praise it to heart's content and later the dish would be distributed to others as 'prasad'. We would see some poor margiis bringing just fistful of undercooked rice and even that Baba would relish as the best dish in the world! Baba was hungry for love and not taste. Even the most poortest margii would feel that Baba is his/her own.

## My experiences

I got initiated in 1978 at age of 19. By then, with Baba's grace I already was a big devotee of Baba. And with initiation I started discovering and understanding more depths of mind and devotion. I remember being so ecstatic in Baba's presence. In DMC I had gotten VSS (______) (guard's duty). I was in uniform and on Baba's arrival in DMC pandal I was supposed to salute Baba in the right way along with other guards. However when Baba arrived and I saw Him walking towards us, looking at Him I was so much in bliss that as Baba neared my hands involuntarily went up in Namaskar pose. I was the only one in _namaskar_ pose, while the rest were in salute pose. As part of my duty and in the uniform, namaskar was wrong. Then and there Baba called out the VSS dada and said "What is this? Did you not teach the boys the right protocols?" Dada asked for forgiveness and took us inside for next duties. 

Later in the day, after changing the uniforms, I again had an opportunity to garland Baba. I had a decent size garland ready. I carried it in my hands and was waiting for Baba. When Baba arrived there were so many margiies waiting to garland him and meet him. And this time _again_ looking at Baba I was so much in bliss that I just froze and kept gazing at Baba from where I was. Baba, lovingly this time, said "Arey pehly us bache ka har lao[hindi]" (Arey, first please get the garland from the kid.) Such was His love and attention. Even when thousands were present each devotee would feel His love.

In 1979-80, I had my first P.C with Baba. I did my pranam to Baba and sat at a distance. Baba for some reason started speaking in English to me "Come closer my little boy. Sit here". I came closer to him and spoke to him in Hindi that my English is not good. Baba said "What? Why did you not learn English in school?" I said to him "Baba, due to our family situation we could not learn English." Baba then asked "What do you do". I told him that I have a business. Baba acted surprised, "what business do you do?" Here I understood business typically meant big businesses like Tatas and Birlas. I said "Baba I mean small work. We are goldsmiths. We mend gold, pierce children's ears and so on.." Baba said "Ok ok. Say to me 'from today onwards I have become a good person'". In the flow I immediately replied, "yes Baba from today onwards I will try to become a good person". Baba corrected, "No no say I HAVE become a good person". "Yes Baba, I HAVE become a good person"
Towards the end, Baba asked me "What do you wish for my Boy?". In my devotional state, I said "Baba. I want the dust of your feet on my head". Baba, the lord of the lords, He always fulfil's His devotees's wishes, He then lied back and broght His feet towards me. I immediately grabbed His soft feet and started rubbing them on my face and head. I kept rubbing them for a minute or so, Baba had to interrupt me "Are you done my boy?", I said "Yes Baba I am almost done". And soon I left the room, full of bliss.




